Hello everybody and welcome to this quick tip about moving around in the viewport.
Now some of this we've covered already so be a great refresher and some of you may have forgotten it
so let's crack on straight away.
The first thing that you may already be experiencing in the viewport itself is when you press down the
middle mouse button you start trying to orbits around your model all you're using this symbol at the
top here.
It's all over the place and you're not really rotating around the thing you have selected.
Okay.
So if we go up to edit and then preferences.
Now if we have a look down here we can see that there are many many options and on the sidebar here
we're talking about how we're navigating around the 3D view.
I hope it's still under there under navigation.
Here we go.
We've got orbit around selection, auto perspective, auto depth etc..
So orbits around selection.
What does a tick in it but it's not doing what we think it is.
And that's because our selection is much larger than what we can see in the scene.
So when we just select the board it is doing so.
However when we select the board lights and camera Well the lights and camera are still miles and
miles out over here.
So we're actually rotating around the central point of these three objects.
So that is something to watch out for.
But yes if we go back to edit preferences or if that doesn't come up after you've done that you may
have it open in another window still making sure orbits around selection is something that I really
love having turned on.
The other thing that can be incredibly useful is when you are zooming in and out you may prefer it zooming
to the mouse position.
Now this is something that some people find really annoying and others quite useful.
So zooming to the mouse position if that's turned on and we go back to our viewport we can use our mouse
to keep scrolling in.
And this is a great example of we run out of zoom, I literally cannot zoom in any further.
So we need to reset the zoom points at this point so I'm going to select my board.
I'm going to go to view and frame selected number pad full stop or number pad period.
So go ahead and do that.
Now the zoom is back and working and because we got it zooming based upon where the mouse cursor is
it does enable you to zoom in and out quite easily.
But as you can see that I can't easily get the rest of the board back in frame.
Personally I don't like it doing that.
I do prefer it to be off.
And then if I save my user preferences so it's the same all the time and every new blend file we see
that we zoom in and out based upon what's in the center of the screen so I will often place the thing
I need in the center of the screen first and then zoom in and adjust just that's just the way that I
work.
If you work differently that's absolutely fine.
We don't need to worry about that now being able to move around the scene.
Otherwise ahh still everything selected.
Make sure you've got the appropriate thing selects it being able to move around being able to walk or
fly around the scene if we go to view navigation once again same area, If scroll down we've got this
walk and fly navigation they're really really useful.
Personally I prefer the walk rather than the fly and you can access that by holding down the shift key
and the grave or tilde the key which is the one next to the number one on your keyboard if you press
that down it will enable walk or fly mode and then you can move around your scene if you're moving too quickly
we can use the scroll wheel slow down that movement and this is how you could also animate a camera
if you wanted to as well be a bit jerky unless you are really good sets but you use the controls W.A.
S & D which will be familiar to you if you've ever played a first person shooter or any first person game
W going forward.
S going back and then strafing left and right with A and D.
Q and E will go up and down if that's if you've been paying attention to the bottom of the screen you
can see a big old list of buttons you can press one of my favorites is either pressing down the middle
mouse button and I've missed it at that point there we go you can all press space you can jump and teleport
to certain locations which can be really really useful.
The other thing that you can do is turn gravity on so the moment gravity is turned off.
But if we press the tab key it will turn gravity on and I'm just gonna press escape and come out of
that for the moment.
Notice it resets the view.
I just wonder whether gravity is in fact turned on because of expected to fall right then.
So if we go to our scene properties gravity is turned on and it's set to minus nine point eight meters
per second let's just try that again.
It might not be functional yet or you can press the G key You know it seems to reset it's above our board
at the moment.
So with gravity on are there we go.
It's just tiny and we've fallen off of it and gone away.
So it's a bug caused by the size of our board rather than anything else.
And probably the same with the jumping to and the teleporting where it is just placing us on top remember
because is the number pad period key or if we don't have anything selected selected it first and then
go numpad period to zoom back in.
Okay.
And just a reminder that up here on the top right of the 3D viewport you do have the option of moving
things around.
Now with the camera set up it is incredibly useful if you're looking through the camera and then go
shift in the grave keep your Tilda you can then zoom in and adjust the camera position even if you're
not animating it.
So here we go.
I've moved the camera in a lot closer to our scene and what we can do for the moment is I can turn on
shaded mode so we can see the effects of a light.
And I'm going to move this light down a little and bring it closer into our scene.
In fact, the first thing I'm gonna do is just position it in the center of the scene so I'm going to highlight
all of those press zero, Oo its right in the center of the scene G Z and just lift it up and out of the
way and then move it across.
In this case on the X axis to give us a bit of light coming in and from that we've already made the
scene look a bit more atmospheric but I can also see we're going to have to tweak with some of the settings
because I know for a fact if we switch across to cycles we get our shadows perfectly.
But with eevee they're not there so we need to turn our shadows and we need to do a few other things
as well to get it working at this scale and fine, I'm going to switch back to lookdev for the moment so I can
see how everything's getting on.
I think we've got everything set up that I need and we select the chessboard frame everything back, There
we go perfect and we can see at the moment the camera does get in the way a little so again managing
the viewport itself what we can do is over in the outliner and just hide the camera out of view.
It's still there when we go to it but it's now not crossing over the rest of our models.
And the same is true of all of these relationship lines if we don't want them there we can go to overlays
and turn those off.
And in fact I'm going to leave mine like that because I know that these things are linked together as
I need them.
Okay.
Brilliant.
Well that's it for this quick tip on better viewport control.
I hope it helps you out massively if you've got any other tips you want to share with everybody.
Put them in the Q and A's or discussions and I'll see you all in the next lecture.